Hi, I'm Simon Douglas here to talk
about 64-bit I/O Kit Drivers
for Large-Memory Systems.
There's actually two very independent
parts to 64-bit support in I/O Kit.
The first part is 64-bit
physical address support for I/O,
and that's being added with the
Mac Pro hardware and 10.4.7 software,
which just got announced.
The second part is 64-bit
virtual address support,
and that's for
I/O Kit client applications,
and that's shipping with Leopard.
So on to part one,
which is 64-bit physical addressing.
As I said, that's shipping with the
Mac Pro just announced and in 10.4.7,
but it's not supported
by any earlier release.
So up until this point,
we have supported machines that
have greater than 4GB of memory.
And the G5 desktop machines
were the first Apple machines
that we shipped that way.
However, the situation on the G5 hardware
was that all I/O went through some
onboard hardware that remapped
it into the target address space.
And so that meant that a driver could
address all of memory in the machine with
only 32 bits of addressing capability.
And because of that,
there are very few software
changes needed in the drivers
to support the G5 desktops.
It was pretty invisible to them since
they could continue to use 32-bit
addresses to get to all of memory.
With the new Mac Pro hardware, though,
we don't have this remapping
capability on the onboard hardware.
So that means that any I/O devices that
do DMA and the drivers that drive those
devices need to be able to address memory
that's above the 4-gig 32-bit limit.
And if you have a driver
that uses physical addresses,
which usually means that you're a
device that does DMAs to system memory,
you must make changes to be
compatible with the large
memory Mac Pro configurations.
And to make sure that any
device that does do 32-bit
I/O doesn't corrupt physical
memory due to address truncation,
we've made the 32-bit physical
address APIs panic the system on
a large-memory Mac Pro system.
There is one caveat here and that's
that all the network mBufs are
allocated in the low memory which
is accessible to 32-bit hardware.
To support the Mac Pro,
we've added a new API,
a new class called IODMA Command.
And this is a new interface for
obtaining physical addresses.
It's designed to work transparently
on all the architectures,
so it works the same on G5,
desktop machines, portables,
PowerPC and Intel machines.
And that's important because the
hardware that's coming in the
future may operate differently
from how the Mac Pro works today,
and we may have the capability
to remap I/O addresses again.
So it's very important that
you use IODMA command to obtain
your physical addresses to be
compatible with future hardware.
So what is an I/O DMA command?
It's an object that represents an
instance of an I/O DMA request.
And that means that the instance
has to exist for the entire
duration that the I/O is in flight.
As far as the software goes,
the API replaces I/O Memory Cursor
and the API I/O Memory Descriptor
Get Physical Segment,
which were the old 32-bit APIs for
obtaining physical addresses.
And what I/O DMA command adds
to those older interfaces is a
specification of what your capabilities
are as far as addressing memory.
So that's basically a specification
of the limitations of your hardware.
And if your hardware does
have some limited addressing,
IODMA command adds support for doing
the necessary buffering and copying.
That allows your hardware
to access memory that's out
of its addressing limits.
The advantage to doing it in the
system is that we can do it only for
the pages that need to be copied,
and we can also share any buffers that
are needed across the entire system.
So as I said,
when you create an I/O DMA client,
you have to give it a specification of
exactly the kind of memory that your
particular hardware can get access to.
And usually the most important
number is the number of address
bits your hardware can support.
32 and 64 are common.
There's also some graphics devices,
for example, that have settled on 39
and 40 bits of addressing,
and that's all fine.
Obviously the optimal situation is
that your device can get access to
all of the memory in the system.
And usually that means you
have 64 bits of addressing.
That's obviously going to be the best
performing solution because we'll
never have to copy or double buff the
memory and it's highly encouraged.
There are some other parameters that
you pass to the IID make-and-find
when you create it that also
specify the limits of your hardware.
The first one is the max segment size.
That sets a limit on the
physically contiguous chunk that
your hardware can do I/O in.
Another one is that you can now
pass an alignment restriction.
For example,
it's quite common for hardware
to only be able to DMA directly
to a 4-byte aligned buffer.
If you're in that situation,
then you can use the alignment
restriction to let I/O DMA command
take care of doing any
double buffering necessary.
Another one is the Max Transfer Size and
that just simply sets the
largest size of any I/O that
will be allowed to your driver.
And then the final one is you can set
the format of the physical addresses that
I/O DMA client will be returning to you.
And most importantly you can decide
whether or not to use 32 or 64-bit
addresses and they can be in big,
little or high standardness.
So how do you go about
using an IIDMA command?
As I said,
you have to have an IIDMA command
object instance per I/O.
So you may create one per I/O,
or you could have a command pool that's
created when the driver starts up.
And then when an I/O request comes in,
you need to point the IODMA command
at the memory descriptor of the I/O.
And there's an API called
setMemoryDescriptor to do that.
You also have to call an
API called IODMA command prepare.
The IODMA Command Prepare and
Complete APIs are low-level
DMA start and end bracketing APIs.
They're actually completely
distinct from the old
IMMJscriptor Prepare and Complete,
and they do very different things.
That means that IMMJscriptor
Prepare and Complete should still
be called in exactly the same
places that it was called before.
Once you've got your DMA command
pointed at the memory descriptor,
you can use the APIs to generate either
64-bit physical addresses and lengths or
32-bit physical addresses and lengths.
You use those addresses to
build your DMA command list
and kick off the hardware I/O.
And then when the I/O completes,
you need to call those bracketing
methods in IDMA commands complete
and clear memory descriptor to mark
that the I/O has been completed.
So as I said,
the best situation to be in is
obviously if your hardware can address
all of the memory in the system,
in which case IDMA kind will
usually never have to copy
or double-buffer memory.
So for example,
the Mac Pro hardware supports
up to 64 gigabytes of RAM,
so that means if your hardware has
at least 36 bits of addressing,
I/O DMA command will
never have to copy memory.
If your driver wants to make sure
that I/O DMA command is never used
and it's buffering in copy mode,
there's an option you
can pass to enforce this,
and this is called Kiterate only.
When you use IODMA command in this mode,
you're basically just using it
as an iterator over the memory
descriptor's physical addresses.
If IEDMA command is being used in this
mode and it ever does hit a physical
address that would be outside of your
hardware's addressing restrictions,
it will just fail to return any such
physical address and give you an error.
The advantage to using it,
if you're in the situation
where you expect to have
direct access to all of memory,
you can use a single IADMA command
instance in this mode simply as an
iterator over the memory descriptor,
in which case you're basically
just using it to generate 64-bit
physical addresses and it's a direct
replacement for IAMemoryCursor and the
IAMemoryDescriptorGetPhysicalSegment
APIs,
which were the older 32-bit APIs.
However, if you're using I/O DMA command
in the general case where it could
have some extra buffers that have
been associated with the DMA,
these buffers have to be
synchronized with the original data.
This buffering scheme is often
called "bounce buffering".
The synchronization happens when
I/O DMA Command Prepare is called.
And when Prepare is called,
the bounce buffers are brought
in sync with the original data.
And when Complete is
called on I/O DMA Command,
the DMA data in the bounce
buffer is copied back to
the original client buffer.
And both of those copies will depend on
how the memory descriptor was prepared,
in particular the direction of
the prepared memory descriptor.
If your driver knows that the data in
the original buffer has been changed
since the DMA command was created for it,
there's an explicit
API called Synchronize,
and you can use that to copy data
backwards and forwards between the
bounce buffers and the original data.
Obviously,
if there is no bounce buffer or
there's no synchronization needed,
then Synchronize will just be a no-op.
So often you'll use this if you
know that the memory descriptor has
changed out from underneath the DMA.
An example might be if memory descriptor
read or write bytes was called,
or the CPU itself actually
changed the data in the buffer.
That covers I/O DMA command.
There's another class of problem
where your hardware may need to have a
buffer that's been allocated once and
shared with the hardware and software.
And this is often used
for a DMA program list,
for example.
When you're in this case,
you know that you need to allocate
the buffer in a certain address
range in memory so that the
hardware always has access to it.
And as I said earlier,
network MBUS are actually
always allocated by default
in 32-bit addressable memory.
So you don't have to
worry about that case.
So to cover this,
we've got a new API and I/O buffer memory
descriptor called InTaskWithPhysicalMask.
And the main addition is
a 64-bit address mask,
and that basically sets the allowable
physical address bits that your
hardware is prepared to support.
So most commonly,
you would pass a number like, you know,
Fox, Fox, Fox, Fox,
0000 for 32-bit addressable
page-aligned memory.
and you'll quite often want that
memory to be physically contiguous,
which is an option.
So quite often today when you've been
allocating your DMA program lists,
you've been using an
API called IML at Contiguous.
And for compatibility
with the current software,
that will always return a
32-bit accessible memory.
There's another case where
buffers need to be allocated
with certain restrictions,
and that's for USB and FireWire clients,
where they're allocating buffers
to be used for Isochronous I/O.
And because of the performance
restrictions on that kind of I/O,
USB and FireWire will require
their clients to allocate buffers
with a certain restriction.
And that's covered in
their session tomorrow,
which is tomorrow morning at 10:30,
the I/O Technologies Overview session.
So that covers the
Mac Pro 10.4.7 changes.
The second part to 64-bit address
support in I/O Kit is support for
virtual addresses greater than 32-bit,
which is being added in Leopard.
And as you know,
Leopard is adding broader support for
tasks running with 64-bit address spaces.
But even in Leopard and
even on 64-bit hardware,
the kernel is going to
remain a 32-bit task.
And that means that KEXs continue
to be compiled as 32-bit code.
So you don't have to go out
and recompile all of your kegs
to run on a 64-bit system.
So very often there'll be absolutely
no driver changes needed for
64-bit for virtual address support
because most often the family will
take care of creating the memory
descriptor that represents the client
buffer before your driver sees it.
So for example,
if you're writing a storage driver and
you're just generating a DMA list for
a buffer that's being passed to you,
you never see the virtual
address in the client,
so you don't really care if
they're a 64-bit or 32-bit task.
However,
there is one class of driver that will
have to change to support 64-bit clients,
and that's if you've implemented
an I/O User-Client subclass.
Because most often they will deal
directly with client virtual addresses.
So if you do want your driver
to support 64-bit tasks,
in other words 64-bit applications,
and you implement an
I/O User-Client subclass,
then it's very likely you'll
have to make changes for Leopard.
To support this, we've added some APIs in
I/O Memory Descriptor.
Basically, everywhere a virtual address
"The first version of the I/O Kit was
passed into I/O Memory Descriptor.
There is now a 64-bit
version of that API.
So, for example,
we have an API I/O Memory Descriptor
with address and that takes a
vm_address_t address and that's
got a new version now called
I/O Memory Descriptor with address range
and that takes a mach_vm_address_t type.
The types are mach_vm_address_t
and mach_vm_size_t,
and the kernel defines these
to be always 64-bit quantities,
regardless of whether or not
the task is 32- or 64-bit.
Whereas the older types,
vm_address_t and vm_size_t,
the kernel defines those types to be the
size of the compiled code that's running.
So since the kernel
is only a 32-bit task,
that means that
vm_address_t and vm_size_t
We're running 32-bit quantities,
so obviously they can't be used to
represent an address in a client
application because he could be 64-bit.
And very much the same way
I/O Memory Map has any API that
returns a virtual address,
now has a 64-bit version.
So the behavior of the
current 32-bit APIs,
number one is obviously if you're using
the current 32-bit APIs on a 32-bit task,
there is no change at all.
There are changes when you attempt to use
the 32-bit APIs on a 64-bit client task.
The first one is that an API such as
I/O Memory Descriptor with Address,
which is attempting to create
an I/O Memory Descriptor for
a range of memory in a task,
if that task is 64-bit will
actually fail outright and not
create an I/O Memory Descriptor
for you in that situation.
If you do manage to get by that
call and manage to get an I/O memory
mapping created and then call the
old 32-bit version of the API,
which is get virtual address,
we can't actually fail that call,
but we will warn you that there's
an address truncation taking place.
Net Warning is logged to the system
log and there's some text information
logged there as well so you get a
backtrace to try and track down the call.
But generally the first failure
will mean that you can't
create a memory descriptor,
so therefore you can't create a mapping.
When you're going through your
I/O User Client subclass for
Leopard to support 64-bit,
What we recommend doing is just
replacing all of the parameter
in-calls with a simple structure-in,
structure-out style of call.
We still have the scalar-based
calls and we do have 64
versions of those scalar calls,
but they're generally being quite
confusing for developers and most
people are used to an ICTL kind
of interface and so the simple
structure-in and structure-out
calls seem to be the most popular.
What you have to do is basically go
through any of your parameters and make
sure that any of the parameters that
refer to client virtual addresses need
to be converted to the 64-bit types.
And generally what you want to
do is for both 32 and 64-bit
clients is just settle on a 64-bit
type for all of your parameters.
And when you do that the kernel
can then treat all of the clients
the same because all of the
addresses coming in are 64-bit.
And then you take those parameters and
pass them to the new 64-bit versions of
the I/O Memory Descriptor APIs whenever
you're dealing with the client virtual
addresses and mapping client memory.
Another thing to watch out for when
implementing an I/O user client,
because the kernel has been compiled for
32-bit and the client could potentially
have been compiled for 64-bit,
that means that C-compile code has very
different structure alignment by default.
So you have to make sure that
when you define your structures,
they're defined in such a way that
they will be aligned identically
between 32-bit and 64-bit.
This is actually documented
quite well in this tech note
that I'm pointing out here,
and that's been around
since Tiger supported
64-bit for Darwin clients.
And we have some sample
code on the seed CD,
and that's in developer examples I/O Kit.
And that is a sample of a
KEXT that uses IODMA command.
to iterate over an I/O memory
descriptor and get the physical
addresses in a 64-bit and 32-bit form.
And it also has an I/O user
client implementation
That works the same on both
32 and 64-bit Intel and PPC.
So it's quite a small sample
and pretty easy to understand.
I'm going to pass over now to
Curtis Gallowaay who's going
to give us an update on EFI.
[Transcript missing]
I'll give you an overview of what EFI is,
why you should care about EFI,
if you should care about EFI,
how EFI is different from open firmware,
how EFI works on a Mac,
and writing EFI device
drivers and applications.
So first of all, EFI,
maybe you've heard of it.
I don't know.
How many of you out here have
written I/O Kit drivers before?
Yeah.
How many of you are actually
writing drivers during the session?
So maybe you're familiar with EFI then.
EFI is the Extensible Firmware Interface,
which is the firmware that's
used on Intel-based Macs.
It's extensible because it's easy for
Apple to extend it in the firmware and
for developers to write drivers that
actually extend EFI's functionality.
It's firmware,
so it actually lives in the machine.
It's built into the hardware.
And it's a well-defined interface
that has published specification
that you can download and
read and hopefully understand.
Should you care about EFI?
Well, it depends.
Maybe you shouldn't care about EFI.
If you don't write any device drivers
and you don't make any hardware,
then you probably shouldn't
care about it all that much.
If you do make a boot device,
like for example a RAID device or some
other piece of hardware that's required
during the boot process that doesn't
follow a standard interface like ATA or
something that's already built in,
then maybe you do care.
If you want to run a pre-boot
application such as a hardware test
or some kind of repair utility,
then maybe you do care.
You want to write something that
doesn't actually use the OS.
But in general,
if you can do something in the OS,
then you should not do it in EFI.
Let me just give you a brief history
of personal computer firmware.
Apple, up until recently,
has used Open Firmware,
which was invented by Sun as
Open Boot way back in 1988.
It was adopted by Apple for our first
generation of PCI machines and was
actually standardized by the IEEE.
The PC industry has
traditionally used BIOS,
which is the basic input/output
system which goes all the way back
to 1980 and the original IBM PC.
It was sort of a hack they came up with.
They decided they needed something, "Oh,
let's do this," and it's kind of
persisted for all these years.
The history of BIOS is kind of checkered.
It's industry standard,
but that doesn't mean that
there's really a standard in
the industry for how it works.
It's generally written
entirely in assembly code.
It runs in 16-bit mode,
which is really old.
It's not standardized at all,
and generally it's kind of a mess.
On the other hand,
EFI was conceived by some really smart
people at Intel to replace BIOS and was
intended to be kind of a well-thought-out
alternative to the agglomeration of
random things that BIOS had turned into.
It has more modern features like Unicode,
strings, 64-bit physical addressing,
and it's now turned over
to the unified EFI forum,
which is a group of companies that
are interested in promoting EFI,
which Apple is a member of.
EFI has many benefits both
for Apple and for developers.
Unlike BIOS,
there's very little assembly code in it,
so it's possible for normal people to
understand it and write code for it.
It has good debugging tools,
so you can actually run a debugger
and find out what's going on.
It's easy to extend both inside
EFI and with drivers and applications.
It allows us to leverage our
existing device driver writing
expertise so that someone,
for example,
who's written an I/O Kit driver
for the Bluetooth family could
easily go and write EFI driver for
Bluetooth without having to learn some
strange backwards language like fourth.
Not that I'm down on fourth,
but people seem to be
kind of allergic to it,
so that's sort of a problem.
It has very good performance
compared to OpenFirmware,
which is not so much a knock on
OpenFirmware's implementation
as the design of it,
as I'll explain a little
bit more in a moment.
And there's third party support.
You can go buy an implementation
of EFI for your machine
from multiple vendors.
You can buy tools from multiple
vendors for developing and debugging
EFI drivers and applications.
So that's already a plus.
[Transcript missing]
I just explained that.
OpenFirmware does have
human-readable device paths,
which are real Unix-y
looking things like,
you know, slash PCI, blah, blah, blah.
EFI does not have the idea of
human-readable device paths by default.
An EFI device path is a binary structure,
which is flexible so that you
can have it describe any kind
of device by just extending it
with a new kind of structure,
but it makes it a little bit
more difficult to look at
a path and see what it is.
There is a standard in the new
EFI spec for how to translate that
into something that you can see,
but it's a little bit
less straightforward.
OpenFirmware device drivers
are written in fourth,
and even though there's an F in EFI,
they're written in C, so maybe,
I don't know,
they should change the acronym.
OpenFirmware does not use a runtime
component in Apple computers.
There is a definition in the
standard for a runtime component
that can live on into the OS,
but we don't actually use that.
But in EFI,
there is a runtime service that the
operating system can take advantage
of for things like getting the time,
resetting the system,
using NVRAM variables,
and we do take advantage of
that in our operating system.
So starting up your Mac with EFI,
how is that different?
Well,
it's pretty much exactly like starting
up your Mac with Open Firmware,
which is kind of what
our customers expect.
Not too many changes.
Under the covers, really,
it's doing a similar set of things,
initializing the hardware.
But there are a few UI differences
that I can show you.
If you want to get into--
The EFI Boot Picker on
your Intel based Mac,
just hold down the Option key
when you're starting up.
So in that sense, it's just like an
Open Firmware based machine.
I've got a little Mac Mini here,
which has one volume on it,
which shows up.
So if I had multiple partitions,
those would show up in the Boot Picker.
But I can also take a USB device
like my iPod here and plug it in.
And the Boot Picker will notice
that I plugged in a new device.
And in fact,
it even knows what kind it is,
because it stored the
volume icon on the device.
Or I can take a shuffle or some other
USB thumb drive and plug that in,
or just a random SanDisk cruiser.
And EFI will notice all of those
devices and let me pick from them.
And in fact,
I can even use the remote control
to navigate back and forth.
Because, you know,
we're Apple and we're cool.
So if you want to boot the EFI shell,
you just put that on your thumb drive.
You can download the
shell from tianocore.org,
which I'll talk about later,
and just run the EFI shell,
which should make you feel a lot like
it's 1980 and you're running DOS.
It's kind of exciting.
Or if you are creative and
do a little bit more work,
you can actually write
your own EFI application,
which I'll show you here.
Which it is possible to do.
We wrote a little demo application
here in EFI just to prove that it is
in fact possible to draw some graphics.
You have support for timers,
dual animation, get the system time.
So it is possible to do reasonably
complicated things in EFI.
Hopefully your application will
be a little bit more technically
functional than this one.
But thanks to Ronnie and
Josh for helping out with that.
That's our big demo.
And just one last thing
to show on the UI front.
It's really hard to demo
things with something like EFI.
You do all this work and all
you have to show for it is,
"Look, the machine turned on." So,
you know, the machine turned on.
So the real eye candy
is stuff like the poof.
When you show it to the executives,
that's the kind of stuff that
they get all excited about.
So for all you hardware
developers out there,
make sure you put some kind of slick
UI that you can show off because
that'll get you promoted faster.
So, back to the world of slides.
As you can see, starting up,
it's a little fancier, but in general,
most people will probably never see that,
which is kind of too bad.
So you can show that to your grandma or
whoever when you're installing her Mac.
So what EFI does under the covers
is when you turn on the machine,
there's a little bit of assembly
that runs to set up kind of
the pre-execution environment,
and then you get into basically looks
like device drivers that initialize a
minimal set of hardware in the machine.
It sets up the memory and the
PCI bus and a few other things.
And then its real job is to load and
execute the bootloader for the system.
So if you've told it through
an NVRAM where that is,
it will find it directly
and load it and run it.
Otherwise, it will go search for it.
And the bootloader then uses the
EFI services just like it would the
operating system if it were a regular
operating system program to find
and load the kernel device drivers.
And then the kernel takes
over and terminates.
EFI is terminated,
and the operating system
owns the whole system,
except for a little bit of EFI that
lingers around as a runtime service.
So again,
the boot program draws the Apple logo.
So if you're debugging a system,
you see the Apple logo,
you know the boot loader loaded.
It loads the OS and drivers,
either the caches or
the individual drivers,
into memory.
It leaves behind some information
that it got from EFI that it
constructs in a device tree format
that it can pass off to I/O Kit.
So in that sense, it's similar to how
Open Firmware does it.
It basically simulates an Open Firmware
device tree just for convenience.
And then it terminates EFI except for the
runtime services and starts the kernel.
So again, when you're debugging,
if you see the little spinning gear,
that means the kernel has started.
And you know that the booter is done,
and you've gone into kernel space.
So for configuring EFI's behavior,
NVRAM variables are used to control
some aspects of how EFI works.
In EFI terminology,
they're just called EFI variables.
They don't have to be in NVRAM.
They can be stored somewhere else,
but our implementation
uses NVRAM for that.
In Apple terminology,
it's NVRAM variables.
That's what you use for writing
from the operating system.
Non-volatile RAM, it's actually stored
in Flash in hardware.
EFI variables are named by a 128-bit
GUID for the vendor and a Unicode
16-bit wide string as the name of it.
So in theory,
an Apple variable won't conflict
if you install Linux or some
other operating system on there
and they use EFI variables.
The GUIDs will make sure that your
variable names don't ever conflict.
And if you are a developer who's
writing an EFI device driver,
you can set your own variables with
your own GUID that you make up.
And you don't have to worry about
prefixing them with anything.
Just name them whatever you like.
The NVRAM variables used by the operating
system are implemented as EFI variables.
So if you get into the EFI shell
and you know the GUID that we use,
you can look at all of those,
set them in the shell,
and examine them that way.
They are set using different vendor
GUIDs for different purposes of things.
For example,
internally within our firmware,
there are some settings that
are stored in NVRAM that use a
different GUID than the ones that the
OS variables use so they don't conflict.
Any variables that are set by third-party
drivers could again use their own GUID.
The NVRAM command in the OS can
be used to set NVRAM variables
that persist across an OS boot.
So that's your standard interface
that you would use from the
operating system for NVRAM variables.
Just like in the old days,
it works exactly the same way.
There's an extension to that that
lets you prefix a GUID to the name of
the variable so that you can actually
read and write other variables
that are set either in the firmware
or by drivers or anyone else.
So that's one difference from open
firmware that you might notice.
It's documented in the man page.
Behavior that's controlled
by NVRAM variables
includes target disk mode.
So when you start up the machine,
hold down the T key and it turns
into a big FireWire disk drive.
That's actually initiated by a
variable that the firmware looks at.
The firmware updater, if you run that,
basically just the application
sets a path to launch the
firmware updater once only,
which is a real nice convenience.
If you set a firmware password,
that's stored in NVRAM as well.
And BootCamp uses NVRAM to configure
some of its behavior for booting
into a legacy operating system.
The booter actually
interprets one NVRAM variable,
boot args, to look at some of its
aspects of how it works.
For instance,
if you want to get a text console to see
what the booter is doing for debugging,
you can set -v in the boot args
and the booter will look at that.
Also, you can set the root partition
or where it looks for
various things that it loads.
You can also set boot variables in a
plist file that's read by the booter,
which is stored on disk,
or if you're netbooting,
it's actually read from the
same location as the booter.
And this is a big convenience
for debugging and for netbooting.
And it might be mysterious if you set
something in there and forget about it
and clear out your NVRAM and wonder,
"Why is it still verbose booting?" Well,
you might have set something in your
plist file that the booter is looking at.
So, EFI device drivers.
Let's say you are a hardware vendor
and you think that you might want
to write an EFI device driver.
Well,
are you really sure you want to do that?
If you have a device that is a
boot device that is not standard,
as I said before,
then maybe you do need to do that.
So,
the best practice is to actually build
that into the ROM on your system.
And we provide standard EFI interfaces
according to the EFI spec,
which you can download from Intel's
website for the 1.1 or from the
UEFI website for the latest one.
And we have a few extensions that we use
to do our whizzy stuff like the icons
and making the screen look beautiful,
but those are not required for a device
driver that just controls a device that
the operating system wants to boot from.
EFI applications.
You can do that, as we saw.
It's possible to do that with a computer.
It's also possible to write, you know,
whizzy little EFI applications.
It's not easy.
You don't get a whole lot of
help from EFI for doing stuff
like drawing lines or anything.
You get blit pixels to the screen.
And the rest is up to you.
So, you know, it's not easy.
You can get basic console support
if you just want to do a textual
application for doing something like,
you know, printing out some stuff
about your device.
That's pretty easy.
You can do that from the EFI shell.
So in the spirit of 64-bit,
all of our current Apple systems
use a 32-bit EFI ROM.
But our latest machines, the Mac Pro,
do have a 64-bit processor in them.
And UEFI 2.0, the specification,
does have a spec for a 64-bit ABI for
a version of EFI that basically has
all the same interfaces but has a
different ABI for running in 64-bit mode.
So what that means to you is you
should be prepared for the future and
make sure that your device drivers
on any devices that you make and
sell should support both 32-bit and
64-bit so they're compatible with
both today's machines and any machines
in the future which either Apple or
anyone might ship that work with,
that have a 64-bit EFI ROM in them.
So how do you do that?
Well, you can build natively,
which means you build once on a 32-bit
system and once on a 64-bit system.
The EFI build environment
lets you build one at a time,
which then you can build
separately into your ROM.
That's one way to do it.
That's not a bad way to do it.
You can have them live in
different areas in your ROM.
That might be bigger than you want.
Another solution is EBC, EFI Bytecode,
which is an interpreted
bytecode kind of like Java.
I don't really want to say the word Java,
but in principle it's similar to that,
where your code gets compiled down into
bytecode that's interpreted by the ROM.
It requires a compiler
that Intel will sell you,
and it's interpreted like Java.
There's that word again.
It will run on both 32-
and 64-bit systems as is,
so you don't need to do
anything to make your bytecode
work on either kind of system.
So that's the advantage.
It should be a comparable speed,
unless you're doing matrix transforms
or something insane like that,
which you probably shouldn't
do in your device driver.
And it's only about 50% larger than
just the one-way native binary,
so there's some size savings there,
which might be important to you if
size is a limitation in your firmware.
which it probably is.
The build environment,
you can build on Windows,
which you may like or you may not like.
A lot of device driver vendors
actually like building on Windows,
so more power to you.
You can use Visual Studio plus
some freely available pieces
that you can download.
Intel explains how to do that in
the EFI training documentation
on the Tiano Core website,
which is the open source
website for EFI development.
The EBC compiler is available for
sale from our friends at Intel.
And it is possible to build
with Xcode on MacOSX.
We hope to release that environment
as open source really soon.
And you should check out the
Apple open source website
for more information on that.
That's how we build the OS loader.
We came up with a way of doing that.
And in fact,
Intel is working on a next generation
of the EFI development kit that
will be available for the MacOSX.
And we have a new version of the
EFI development kit that will be
much easier to use on multiple
platforms on Linux on OS X.
So that will be good.
Keep your eyes peeled for that.
There are open source examples available
on Intel's website and we will have
some as well when we release our
open source version of these tools.
Just to give you an example of
what an EFI program looks like,
this is Hello World using
the EFI development kit,
the driver development kit.
So you include some headers.
You have a main, an entry point that
looks a lot like main.
You get a handle to your image,
which is your program.
And then the system table,
which has pointers to various
services that you can use.
And then there's a driver library that
includes a bunch of useful functions
that will take those handles and
squirrel them away for you to use later.
And then you can print.
You notice the L indicating
that it's a driver.
And then the C indicating that
it's a 16-bit Unicode character.
So all strings that are
used are generally Unicode.
So that's a good thing.
But it might take some getting
used to if you're not used to that.
A protocol is the basic
unit of interface in EFI.
That's how you find stuff,
how you find interfaces for doing things
like reading or writing or anything.
A protocol is just a structure
that has pointers to functions
and it's named by a GUID.
So the next version of the protocol
will just have a different GUID so you
can have as many protocols as you want.
There's functions to look
them up and associate them
with handles in the system.
And this is a standard disk I/O protocol
that lets you read and write blocks.
And one of those functions for
reading would look like this.
You pass in a pointer to the structure
that is the protocol and some
arguments and get a return value that
tells you whether it worked or not.
Pretty standard.
You can find a lot more information
about EFI at the TianoCore website,
which is the open source effort
started by Intel that has
actually source code for complete
sample implementation of EFI,
as well as the libraries and headers that
you would need to get started with that.
The specification is available
either on Intel's website for
the 1.1 or the new UEFI 2 spec,
which is followed by our
new Mac Pro hardware,
is available at UEFI.org.
You do have to register to get it,
but it's free.
It doesn't cost anything.
You don't have to join or
sign any massive paperwork.
You just have to say that
you're not going to sue them,
I think.
And for more information,
here are some contacts here at
Apple that you can contact for
more information about UEFI,
EFI development at Apple,
or I/O Kit in general.
It's all available here.
There's on your seed DVD,
there's a bunch of sample
documentation not about EFI but
about I/O Kit in general.